https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1019&context=english-textbooks

1.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this chapter, students will be able to
• Categorize the types of Native American tales and their contribution to
their respective tribes’ cultures.
• Identify significant tropes and motifs of movement in Native American
creation stories.
• Identify the cultural characteristics of Native American creation, trickster,
and first contact stories distinct from European cultural characteristics.
• Identify elements of trickster stories.
• Understand how the search for the Westward passage to Asia led to the
European discovery of the Americas.
• Understand how the search for commodities led to territorial
appropriation of North American land by various European countries.
• Understand the role religion played in European settlement in North
America.
• Understand how their intended audience and purpose affected the
content and tone of European exploration accounts.
1.2 INTRODUCTION
1.2.1 Native American Accounts
It is well to bear in mind that the selections here should not be understood
as representative of Native American culture as a whole. There are thousands
of different Native American tribes, all with distinct practices. It would not be
possible in the space of a typical anthology to represent just the tribes with whom
the colonists had the most contact during the early years of European settlement,
or even to say with any precision exactly how many tribes the colonists did
interact with since European colonists were often unable to distinguish among
different tribes. Additionally, we must realize that these works come to us with 
omissions and mediations. Many Native American tales are performative as well
as oral—the meanings of the words supplemented by expressions, movements,
and shared cultural assumptions—and so the words alone do not represent their
full significance. That being said, the examples of Native American accounts that
follow give us some starting points to consider the different ways in which cultures
explain themselves to themselves.
First among a culture’s stories are the tales of how the earth was created and
how its geographical features and peoples came to be. The Native American creation
stories collected here demonstrate two significant tropes within Native American
creation stories: the Earth Diver story and the Emergence story. Earth Diver stories
often begin with a pregnant female falling from a sky world into a watery world,
such as the ones here from the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) people of the eastern
United States and from the Cherokee people from the southern United States.
Various animals then work together to create dry land so that the woman may give
birth there, starting the process of creating the familiar world and its population.
With Emergence stories, here represented by the Zuni creation story, animals and
people emerge from within the earth, a distinction from the Earth Diver story that
is likely connected to the topography familiar to this tribe from the southwestern
United States. Creation stories feature a “culture hero,” an extraordinary being
who is instrumental in shaping the world in its current form. Other examples in
addition to the works here are the Wampanoag culture hero Moshup or Maushop,
a giant who shared his meals of whale with the tribe and created the island of
Nantucket out of tobacco ash, and Masaw, the Hopi skeleton man and Lord of the
Dead who helped the tribe by teaching them agriculture in life and caring for them
in death. Some creation tales show similarities to Judeo‑Christian theology and
suggest parallel development or European influence, quite possible since many of
these stories were not put into writing until the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Some Native American creation tales show motifs of movement from chaos to
duality to order and beings of creation and destruction paired together, themes also
found in European accounts of creation. However, these tales feature significant
differences to the European way of understanding the world. These tales often
show the birth of the land and of the people as either contemporaneous events,
as with the Earth Diver stories, or as the former figuratively birthing the latter, as
with the Emergence stories. This suggests the context for some tribes’ beliefs in the
essentialness of land to tribal and personal identity. As Paula Gunn Allen (Laguna
Pueblo) asserts in The Sacred Hoop (1986), “The land is not really the place
(separate from ourselves) where we act out the drama of our isolate destinies . . . It
is rather a part of our being, dynamic, significant, real.” In addition, Native
American creation tales often depict the relationship between man and animals
in ways sharply different from European assumptions. In the Haudenosaunee tale
and many other Earth Diver tales like it, animals and cultural heroes create the
earth and its distinctive features collaboratively.
Like creation stories, Native American trickster stories fulfill an explanatory
function about the world; they also explain why social codes exist and why they are
needed. The trickster character—often represented as an animal such as a coyote,
a raven, or a hare—is a figure of scatological humor, frequently focused on fulfilling
and over‑fulfilling physical needs to the detriment of those around him. However,
above all things the trickster represents fluid boundaries. The trickster can shift
between sexes, interacts with both humans and animals, rarely settles down for
any period of time, and is crafty and foolish at the same time. Furthermore, the
Trickster transgresses what is socially acceptable and often what is physically
possible. In one of the best known trickster cycle, that of the Winnebago tribe
originating in the Wisconsin region, the trickster Wakdjunkaga has a detachable
penis that can act autonomously and sometimes resides in a box. These tales
entertain but also function as guides to acceptable social behavior. Through the
mishaps the trickster causes and the mishaps s/he suffers, the trickster tends to
reinforce social boundaries as much as s/he challenges them and also can function
as a culture hero. Much like the culture heroes described previously, the Winnebago
trickster Wakdjunkaga also benefits the tribe. In the last tale of the cycle, s/he
makes the Mississippi River Valley safe for occupation by killing malevolent spirits
and moving a waterfall.
As is apparent in both the creation stories and the Trickster stories, Native
American cultures did not differentiate between animal behavior and human
behavior to the extent that Europeans did. While the European concept of the
Great Chain of Being established animals as inferior to humans and the Bible
was understood to grant man dominion over the animals, the Native American
stories to follow suggest a sense of equality with the animals and the rest of nature.
Animals contributed to the creation of the world upon which humans live, were
able to communicate with humans until they chose not to, and followed (or refused
to follow) the same social codes as humans, such as meeting in councils to discuss
problems as a group and agreeing together on a course of action. Nonetheless,
like with the laxative bulb story, there is tension between the helpful and harmful
aspects of nature, and these works teach the lesson that nature must be given due
respect lest one lose its benefits and suffer its anger.
“In fourteen hundred ninety‑two, Columbus sailed the ocean blue”: the
European perspective on the first contact between Native peoples and European
explorers has been taught to Americans from pre‑school onward, but the Native
American perspective on these events is less familiar. Just like their counterparts,
Native American depictions of first contact with European explorers situated them
within their accustomed natural, spiritual, and social contexts. The explorers’ large
ships were interpreted as whales, houses, or islands; their paler complexions were
a sign of illness or divinity. The gifts or drinks offered by the strangers are accepted
out of politeness and social custom, not naiveté or superstition. As these tales were
recorded with hindsight, they often ruefully trace how these explorers and colonists
disingenuously relied on the natives’ help while appropriating more and more land 
to themselves and their introduction of alcohol and European commodities into
native culture.
1.2.2 European Exploration Accounts
Spain, the first European country to establish a significant foothold in the
Americas in the fifteenth century, was not looking for previously unknown lands
at all. It was looking for a westward passage to Asia. Earlier in the century, the
Ottoman Empire had captured Constantinople and after that point, controlled the
territory through which the traditional land‑based trade routes to China and India
ran, effectively giving the Ottoman Empire a monopoly on trade between Europe
and Asia. Spain, like other European nations, looked for a solution by seeking
a westward route. Spain at that time did not exist as a unified nation but rather
was a collection of kingdoms, sometimes collaborating but more often competing
with each other. The move toward nationhood began when King Ferdinand II of
Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castile married in 1469 and unified two of the more
powerful Iberian kingdoms. To consolidate their economic and regional power,
these monarchs were very interested in securing trade routes for the very lucrative
commodities coming from the east. Additional motivation came from a powerful
rival within the same peninsula. Portugal had already circumnavigated Africa and
looked poised to discover that westward passage. Those influences encouraged
King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella to support Christopher Columbus’ proposal of
finding a western route. Unaware that a landmass intervened between the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans and miscalculating the distance between western Europe and
eastern Asia, Columbus thought he had succeeded in his quest when he landed
on islands in the Caribbean. He hadn’t, but Spain discovered that the New World
had desirable commodities too, namely gold and silver mines that funded Spain’s
empire‑building aspirations.